Add ReClamm Pool docs (#261)
balancer/docs-v3: docs/concepts/explore-available-balancer-pools/reclamm-pool/reclamm-pool-math.md

---
order: 7
title: ReClamm Pool Math
---

# Readjusting Concentrated Liquidity AMM Pool Math

## Intro

> The `Readjusting Concentrated Liquidity AMM` (ReClamm) is a pool based on a "constant product," essentially equivalent to standard weighted math (with a clever redefinition of the token balances). The idea is to concentrate liquidity by adding price bounds to the constant product curve using virtual balances: $L = (R_a + V_a)(R_b + V_b)$, where $R_a$ and $R_b$ are the real balances of the token, and $V_a$ and $V_b$ are the virtual balances of the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Readjusting Concentrated Liquidity AMM` (ReClamm) is a pool based on a "constant product", essentially equivalent to standard weighted math (with a clever redefinition of the token balances). The idea is to concentrate liquidity by adding price bounds to the constant product curve using virtual balances: $L = (R_a + V_a)(R_b + V_b)$, where $R_a$ and $R_b$ are the real balances of the token, and $V_a$ and $V_b$ are the virtual balances of the token.
```

Author: Same thing. The only time punctuation is outside is if it would otherwise be ambiguous: like a password, where you wouldn't be sure if the comma was part of the password or not.

4. Resolve the formula above with Bhaskara to find the value of $V_b$, then replace the value of $V_b$ in the $V_a$ formula.

## Calculation of the Virtual Balances

### When initializing the pool

During pool creation, pass minimum and maximum prices of A ($P_{a_{min}}$ and $P_{a_{max}}$), target price $P_{target}$. The contract also needs to assume an arbitrary $R_{a_{max}}'$, which we suggest should be `1000 * FixedPoint.ONE`.

This allows the pool, during creation, to calculate the virtual balances as:

$V_{a}' = \frac{R_{a_{max}}'}{Q_0 - 1}$

$V_b' = P_{a_{min}}(R_{a_{max}}' + V_a')$

Note, in the equation above, that $Q_0 = \sqrt\frac{P_{a_{max}}}{P_{a_{min}}}$. Also, note that $V_a'$ and $V_b'$ are scaled according to $R_{a_{max}}'$. During the pool initialization, these parameters will be scaled according to the real balances.

Calculate the theoretical balances $R_a'$ and $R_b'$ for the default $R_{a_{max}}'$.

$R_b' = \sqrt{P_{target}V_b'V_a'Q_0} - V_b'$

$R_a' = \frac{R_b' + V_b' - V_a'P_{target}}{P_{target}}$

Calculate the pool centeredness using the parameters above, and check if the pool centeredness is above the margin. If not, reverts.

> ### Proportion Getter
> 
> Between pool creation and initialization, the user must be able to calculate the correct token proportions needed to ensure the target price is respected. This proportion is $\frac{R_b'}{R_a'}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Balance Ratio Getter

Between pool creation and initialization, the user must be able to calculate the correct token proportions (Balance Ratio) needed to ensure the target price is respected. This balance ratio is $\frac{R_b'}{R_a'}$.
```

Author: Good catch!

### Pool initialization

To initialize the pool, we receive the real balances $R_a$ and $R_b$, and need to validate that
 $\frac{R_b}{R_a}==\frac{R_b'}{R_a'}$, with some margin of error (0.01%).

If this is false, revert. Otherwise, calculate the scale of $V_a$ and $V_b$, which is $scale = \frac{R_a}{R_a'}$. Therefore, $V_a = scaleV_a'$ and $V_b = scaleV_b'$.

Finally, ensure the price is close enough to the target price, and the centeredness is above margin.

### On Swap

When executing onSwap, three steps must be performed:

1. Calculate $Q_{0_{current}}$. If `blockTimestamp > endQ0Time`, return $Q_{0_{target}}$. Else, calculate $Q_{0_{current}}$ based on the formula:
    
    $\sqrt{Q_{0_{current}}} = \sqrt{Q_{0_{initial}}}(\frac{\sqrt{Q_{0_{target}}}}{\sqrt{Q_{0_{initial}}}})^{\frac{blockTimestamp - startQ0Time}{endQ0Time - startQ0Time}}$
    

> 2. Check whether Q0 (the price range) is updating. If so, adjust the virtual balances as follows, keeping the pool centeredness constant. This won't move the pool `OUT OF RANGE` if there's no swap, which makes off-chain calculations more reliable and optimizes the price interval calculation when the pool is `OUT OF RANGE`.

Reviewer: This part will probably change, since now we will always update the virtual balances when a swap happens.

Author: Ok; Will remove the conditional part, and we can review this again when we have the final code.

![ReClamm price curve illustration](/images/reclamm-initial-state.png)

### Initial Virtual Balances

During pool creation, the pool creator will define the `minimum price` ($P_{a_{min}}$) and the `maximum price` ($P_{a_{max}}$). Given these three parameters, we can calculate the initial virtual balances.

The invariant of a ReClamm Pool is calculated as follows:

$L = (R_a + V_a)(R_b + V_b)$

Where $R_a$ and $R_b$ are the real balances, $V_a$ and $V_b$ are the virtual balances, and $L$ is the invariant. The current price of the pool is given by:

$P_a = \frac{R_b + V_b}{R_a + V_a}$

Note that we have (arbitrarily) defined it as B/A (i.e., prices represent the value of token A denominated in token B. In other words, how many B tokens equal the value of one A token.)

> Given the price formula, we know that the minimum price happens when the denominator takes on its maximum value: $R_a = R_{a_{max}}$. In this state, $R_b = 0$. (At the edges, one of the balances will be maximum, and the other balance will be 0). Of course there isn't really a "maximum" balance - this is an arbitrary placeholder that will "cancel out" later by getting scaled according to the real initialization balances. For this purpose, we can set it to an arbitrary value, such as 1000. It then follows that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the price formula, we know that the minimum price happens when the denominator takes on its maximum value: $R_a = R_{a_{max}}$. In this state, $R_b = 0$. (At the edges, one of the balances will be maximum, and the other balance will be 0). Before the initialization of the pool the "maximum" balance is not known - so, to calculate the initial balances of the pool, we set the maximum balance of token A to an arbitrary value, and when the initialization amounts are given we can scale accordingly. It then follows that:
```

Mathematically, there is a maximum balance. Given the current invariant and virtual balances, you can find the maximum real balance like this:

L = (Va + Ra_max)(Vb) => Ra_max = (L/Vb) - Va

So, it's not just a placeholder. In the initialization, we choose an arbitrary value to represent a certain value of the pool, and then when the pool is initialized we scale the value of the pool accordingly.

## Pool Centeredness

As noted above, the main idea of this pool is to manage the price interval such that the market price stays within it as much as possible. The pool won't use an external oracle, so we need a mechanism to determine whether the market price is within the current price interval: `Pool Centeredness`.

`Pool Centeredness` is a number (a percentage) that describes how far the pool balances are from the center of the current interval. The number goes from 0 to 1, where 0 means that the balances are at the edge and 1 means that the balances are exactly in the middle of the current price range, which is the case when the pool is initialized. The number is calculated as follows:

1. First, if $R_a$ or $R_b$ are 0, we know that pool centeredness is 0.
2. If not, we calculate $\frac{R_a}{R_b}$ and compare with $\frac{V_a}{V_b}$. Since the virtual balances were calculated based on the real balances, these rates are the same near the center of the interval.
    1. If $\frac{R_a}{R_b} < \frac{V_a}{V_b}$, $centeredness = \frac{\frac{R_a}{R_b}}{\frac{V_a}{V_b}}=\frac{R_a V_b}{R_b V_a}$
    

>     2. Otherwise, $centeredness = \frac{\frac{R_b}{R_a}}{\frac{V_b}{V_a}}=\frac{R_b V_a}{R_a V_b}$

Reviewer: In the contract, this logic is slightly different, we compare `Ra Vb` with `Rb Va` since these multiplication operations have more precision than the division. But, honestly, I think explaining like this is more intuitive, so I'd leave as is.

Anyway, maybe it's worth it putting a note than the contract implementation uses multiplications to be more precise? (Or, if the idea is to show only the logic, I'd leave as is)
